2
Fokker-Planck Equations
2.1 Liouville Equation in Classical Mechanics
The foundations of nonequilibrium statistical mechanics are based
on the Liouville equation. Many of the common methods for handling
practical problems in nonequilibrium statistical mechanics, methods
that will be described in the next few sections, either avoid the Liouville
equation entirely or replace it by approximations. This is generally
a reasonable thing to do; simple and approximate methods have an
enormous value in science. Ultimately, however, the approximate
methods must be connected with more exact and rigorous ones. This
section presents a derivation of the Liouville equation in classical
mechanics and shows how symbolic operator solutions of the Liouville
equation can be used to deal with the properties of time correlation
functions. The Liouville equation is associated with Hamiltonian
dynamics; the corresponding equation associated with Langevin
dynamics, called the Fokker-Planck equation, is discussed in the next
section.
In classical mechanics, a system is fully specified by its coordinates
and conjugate momenta.There are usually many of these; for notational
convenience, the set of all coordinates will be denoted by the single
symbol q, and the conjugate momenta by the single symbol p. The pair
(p, q) gives the location of the system in its phase space, or the "phase
point." Further, when there is no need to be more specific, this point is
denoted for greater brevity by X. The dynamical behavior of the system
30
Zwanzig, Robert. Nonequilibrium Statistical Mechanics, Oxford University Press, Incorporated, 2001.
ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/utxa/detail.action?docID=281466.
Created from utxa on 2019-01-16 11:29:31.
Copyright © 2001. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.
FOKKER-PLANCK EQUATIONS 31
is determined by its Hamiltonian H(p, q) or H(X). For now, this is taken
to be independent of time.
The motion of the system in phase space is governed by Hamilton's
equations,
In principle, this set of first-order differential equations determines
the path or trajectory X, in phase space that passes through a given
phase point X at time t = 0. The state of the system at any time fully
determines its state at all other times, both future and past. The
one-dimensional harmonic oscillator provides an easy illustration. The
Hamiltonian is
the equations of motion are
and their solution, valid for all t, is
Aside from this special case, one can seldom solve Hamilton's equations
exactly. Further, one learns from research on chaotic dynamical
systems that solutions may be extremely sensitive to small changes in
the initial state, so that "exact in principle" does not always mean "exact
in practice." It may be very hard to give a precise prediction of the
future behavior of a given initial state. However, because the present
concern is with formalism, and not with practical calculations, this
difficulty may be ignored.
The Liouville Equation
In classical statistical mechanics, averages are determined by the
phase space distribution function (or phase space density) f(p, q, t)
or f(X, t). The probability of finding the system state in the region
dX around the point X at time t is f(X, t)dX. Probability is conserved;
the total probability that the system is somewhere is unity at
all times,
Zwanzig, Robert. Nonequilibrium Statistical Mechanics, Oxford University Press, Incorporated, 2001.
ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/utxa/detail.action?docID=281466.
Created from utxa on 2019-01-16 11:29:31.
Copyright © 2001. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.
32 NONEQUILIBRIUM STATISTICAL MECHANICS
As in fluid mechanics or electrodynamics, whenever an integral of a
quantity p(X) over an entire domain is conserved, there is generally a
conservation law of the form
where p is a density, V is a velocity, and pV is a flux. In the present
instance, the time rate of change of the density / is the negative of the
divergence of its flux in phase space, and the correspondences are
and
On using Hamilton's equations for the time derivatives of p and q and
canceling out cross terms, this becomes the Liouville equation for the
probability distribution function,
It is often convenient to write this in an operator form. The
Liouville operator is defined by
so that the Liouville equation is
The Liouville equation has the formal operator solution
The Liouville operator is sometimes (especially in older literature)
written with the imaginary factor i = , so that f/ t = —iLf.
There seems to be no special advantage in carrying along the extra
factor of i.
One property of the Liouville operator merits special comment
because it is so frequently used. Consider the integral of LAf over
Zwanzig, Robert. Nonequilibrium Statistical Mechanics, Oxford University Press, Incorporated, 2001.
ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/utxa/detail.action?docID=281466.
Created from utxa on 2019-01-16 11:29:31.
Copyright © 2001. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.
FOKKER-PLANCK EQUATIONS 33
the entire phase space. A multidimensional version of the basic
integral,
can be used to convert an integral over the phase space volume to an
integral over the surface of that volume,
where S is a unit vector normal to the boundary. The volume integral
vanishes as long as VAf vanishes on the boundary of phase space. Typically,
the system is confined to a finite region in configuration space
and has a finite energy. Then the distribution function / vanishes
for coordinates outside that region, and also at very large momenta.
Further, because L contains first derivatives, it can be distributed over
a product, L(Af) = (LA)f+A(Lf). Consequently, L is anti-self-adjoint
in phase space,
Dynamical Variables
The goal of nonequilibrium statistical mechanics is to understand the
time evolution of dynamical properties of a many-body system. These
may be some experimentally observable properties, such as the hydrodynamic
variables (mass density, momentum density, and energy density),
or they may even be some of the coordinates and momenta themselves.
For the present, their exact nature is not important. What is important is
that dynamical properties of a system are functions of its state.
A generic dynamical variable will be denoted by A(X). Because the
state changes with time, so does this variable; at time t, its value is A(Xt).
Because the state at time t depends parametrically on the initial state
X, the value of the variable at time t depends on X. This prompts some
notation that may be confusing at first but is actually quite helpful. The
symbol A will be used in three ways. If A does not contain any argument
at all or contains explicitly only the argument X, as in A(X), then
it denotes the variable itself. If A explicitly contains the argument t, as
in A(t), .A(Xt) or A(X, t), then it denotes the value of the variable at
time t as it evolved from the initial state X. The value of A(t) at t = 0 is
A. (The same multiplicity of interpretations occurs in quantum mechanics,
where, e.g., {x) can denote a pure quantum state as a function of
position x, and (t, x) is a system's wave function as it evolves in time.)
This notation is summarized by A(t) = A(Xt) = A(X, t) and by A = A(X)
= A(t = 0).
Zwanzig, Robert. Nonequilibrium Statistical Mechanics, Oxford University Press, Incorporated, 2001.
ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/utxa/detail.action?docID=281466.
Created from utxa on 2019-01-16 11:29:31.
Copyright © 2001. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.
34 NONEQUILIBRIUM STATISTICAL MECHANICS
When the dynamical variable A is regarded as a function of both the
time t and the initial state X, its initial rate of change with time is a
function of X and can be calculated from
This contains the same Liouville operator that was defined in eq. (2.9).
Note that L operates on functions of the location X = (p, q) in phase
space. The initial rate of change is LA; the initial second time derivative
is the initial rate of change of the initial first derivative, LLA, and
so on. The nth initial time derivative is
This can be used to generate a formal Taylor's series expansion of the
time-dependent dynamical variable in powers of t,
This evidently is the solution of the operator equation,
This is the Liouville equation for the evolution of a dynamical variable.
Just as the Liouville equation for the distribution function is analogous
to the Schrodinger equation in quantum mechanics, this equation is
analogous to the Heisenberg equation of motion.
The operator exp(tL) moves any dynamical variable along a trajectory
in phase space and is sometimes called a "propagator." It has
several interesting and useful properties. For example, it can be moved
inside a function,
and it can be distributed over products of functions,
These identities are due to the uniqueness of the trajectory that passes
through any specified phase point X.
The phase space average of a dynamical variable A at time t is
Zwanzig, Robert. Nonequilibrium Statistical Mechanics, Oxford University Press, Incorporated, 2001.
ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/utxa/detail.action?docID=281466.
Created from utxa on 2019-01-16 11:29:31.
Copyright © 2001. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.
FOKKER-PLANCK EQUATIONS 35
But this is also the average of the time-dependent dynamical variable
over the distribution of initial states,
These two forms are equivalent because L is anti-self-adjoint in phase
space. This is analogous to the Schrodinger-Heisenberg duality in
quantum mechanics.
Time Correlation Functions
The Liouville operator notation provides a convenient way of manipulating
equilibrium time correlation functions (TCF). Some examples
are given here. The TCF of the dynamical variables A and B is
where feq is the equilibrium distribution function. This is also
and by taking the adjoint, it becomes
The exponential operator can be distributed over B and /, and recognizing
that the equilibrium distribution function is invariant to L, we
find
If A and B are the same quantity, their TCF is invariant to time
reversal.
The time derivative of a TCF is another TCF,
This is the TCF of A and the time derivative of B. In the same way, the
second time derivative is
Zwanzig, Robert. Nonequilibrium Statistical Mechanics, Oxford University Press, Incorporated, 2001.
ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/utxa/detail.action?docID=281466.
Created from utxa on 2019-01-16 11:29:31.
Copyright © 2001. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.
36 NONEQUILIBRIUM STATISTICAL MECHANICS
So, for example, the second time derivative of the velocity correlation
function is the negative of the force-force correlation function,
2.2 Fokker-Planck Equations
Fokker-Planck equations are a form of Liouville equation used to
treat the statistical behavior of dynamical systems with Markovian
friction and Gaussian white noise. This section contains a derivation
of the Fokker-Planck equation that corresponds to a given Langevin
equation and some simple illustrations. Some general properties
of Fokker-Planck equations will be discussed in the following
section.
Earlier sections dealt with Langevin equations and their associated
fluctuation-dissipation theorems. It was observed that linear Langevin
equations are easy to solve and that the effects of noise are easy to
work out. But it was also observed that nonlinear Langevin equations
are not easy to solve; the nonlinearity, while not a problem
for numerical simulations, introduces serious difficulties in analytic
studies. One practical way to handle these difficulties is to construct
the Fokker-Planck equation that corresponds to a given Langevin
equation.
Derivation of a Fokker-Planck Equation
Let us start with a quite general Langevin equation for the dynamics
of a set of variables {a1, a2, . . .} denoted for convenience by a. At the
beginning, no special requirements are imposed on the noise-free part
of the dynamics, except that it is Markovian (i.e., has no memory).
However, we do require that the noise is white and has a Gaussian
distribution. The equations of motion are
or, in abbreviated form,
Zwanzig, Robert. Nonequilibrium Statistical Mechanics, Oxford University Press, Incorporated, 2001.
ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/utxa/detail.action?docID=281466.
Created from utxa on 2019-01-16 11:29:31.
Copyright © 2001. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.
FOKKER-PLANCK EQUATIONS 37
where v(a) is some given function of the variables a. The noise F(t) is
Gaussian, with zero mean and the delta-correlated second moment
matrix,
Rather than looking for a general solution of these equations, we ask
for the probability distribution f(a, t) of the values of a at time t. Further,
what we really want is the average of this probability distribution over
the noise. One way to find the noise average is to start by recognizing
that f(a, t) is a conserved quantity,
Whenever a conservation law of this kind is encountered, we expect
that the time derivative of the conserved quantity or density (in
this case, f(a, t)) is balanced by the divergence of a flux, a velocity
times that density. This is the way, for example, that the Liouville
equation is derived in statistical mechanics. Here the space coordinates
are a, the density at a is f(a, t), the velocity at a is da/dt, and the
conservation law is
On replacing the time derivative by the right-hand side of eq. (2.31),
we get
This contains a random term and is called a stochastic differential
equation. We want to use it to derive an equation for the noise average
of f.
The derivation is considerably simplified by using some symbolic
operator manipulations. To begin, we define an operator L (analogous
to the Liouville operator) by its action on any function ,
This is used to write a symbolic solution of the noise-free equation,
The formal or symbolic solution (as an initial value problem) is
Zwanzig, Robert. Nonequilibrium Statistical Mechanics, Oxford University Press, Incorporated, 2001.
ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/utxa/detail.action?docID=281466.
Created from utxa on 2019-01-16 11:29:31.
Copyright © 2001. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.
38 NONEQUILIBRIUM STATISTICAL MECHANICS
Now we add the noise term,
One integration over time leads to the operator equation,
It is important to realize that f(a, t) depends on the noise F(s) only for
times s that are earlier than t. By iterating, we develop a series expansion
for / in powers of the noise. Equation (2.40) is substituted back
into eq. (2.39), leading to
Now we take the average over noise. The initial distribution
function f(a, 0) is not affected by the average, so the term with a single
F and the initial distribution function average to zero. The final
term contains two explicit noise factors, F(t) and F(s), and also those
noise factors that are implicit in f(a, s), but only with times earlier
than s. The noise is Gaussian and delta-function correlated; this
means that on averaging, we can pair the first factor F(t) with the
second factor F(s) or with one of the implicit noise factors in f(a, s).
(For a further explanation, see Appendix 2.) In the first case, we get
(t -- s), and is the second case we get (t — s') with s' < s. But this second
case is not allowed because of the limitation to t > s > s'. Thus only the
first two noise factors need to be paired. The average introduces a
factor B, and the delta function removes the operator e--(t--s)L.The result
is the Fokker-Planck equation for the noise-averaged distribution
function <f(a, t)>,
The first term on the right-hand side is what one had on the
absence of noise. The second term on the right-hand side accounts
for the averaged effects of the noise. At this point, B can be any
function of a.
Zwanzig, Robert. Nonequilibrium Statistical Mechanics, Oxford University Press, Incorporated, 2001.
ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/utxa/detail.action?docID=281466.
Created from utxa on 2019-01-16 11:29:31.
Copyright © 2001. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.
FOKKER-PLANCK EQUATIONS 39
Several comments are in order. The derivation as given here depends
explicitly on two assumptions, that the noise is Gaussian and that it is
delta-function correlated. Otherwise, the factorization of the average
over noise will not work. In particular, the derivation will not work for
a non-Markovian Langevin equation.
Also, no fluctuation-dissipation theorem has been invoked. Nothing
has been said about requiring that <f(a, t)> must approach an equilibrium
distribution at long times. If there is not enough friction to dampen
the heating effect of the noise, we expect that the system will "run
away" so that there is no long time steady state. If there is too much
friction for the noise, the system will cool down and "die." In fact, not
much is known in general about the long time steady state solution of
an arbitrary Fokker-Planck equation. All that we can usually do is guess
at a steady state solution, put it into the equation, and see if our
guess is compatible with v(a) and B. If a steady-state solution is found,
then it implies a relation between v(a) and B which may be called a
fluctuation-dissipation theorem.
In later uses, the angular brackets " " denoting the noise average
will be omitted; we will deal only with the averaged distribution.
Illustrations
The first illustration is the two-variable Brownian motion of a particle
moving in the potential U(x). The Langevin equations are
and the fluctuation-dissipation theorem is
The quantities that go into the general Fokker-Planck equation are
Then the Fokker-Planck equation becomes
Zwanzig, Robert. Nonequilibrium Statistical Mechanics, Oxford University Press, Incorporated, 2001.
ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/utxa/detail.action?docID=281466.
Created from utxa on 2019-01-16 11:29:31.
Copyright © 2001. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.
40 NONEQUILIBRIUM STATISTICAL MECHANICS
Note that if there is no noise or friction, the Fokker-Planck equation
reduces to the standard Liouville equation for the Hamiltonian,
With noise and friction, the equilibrium solution ( f/ t = 0) is
where Q is the partition function at temperature T.
This Fokker-Planck equation is the starting point for many useful
calculations, for example, to determine the rate at which a Brownian
particle crosses a potential barrier. The corresponding equation in
which the coordinate x is replaced by an angle and the momentum p
by an angular momentum is useful in treating molecular reorientation
in liquids.
Another example starts with the same Langevin equation, but now
we assume that the relaxation time = m/ is very much shorter than
any natural time scale associated with motion in the potential U(x).
There are several ways to use this assumption; one was discussed
earlier. Another procedure is to start with the Langevin equation,
We drop the second derivative on the left-hand side and rearrange to
get an approximate Langevin equation for x(t) alone,
This leads to a Fokker-Planck equation that is commonly called the
Smoluchowski equation,
This equation describes diffusion in an external potential; the diffusion
coefficient is
Zwanzig, Robert. Nonequilibrium Statistical Mechanics, Oxford University Press, Incorporated, 2001.
ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/utxa/detail.action?docID=281466.
Created from utxa on 2019-01-16 11:29:31.
Copyright © 2001. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.
FOKKER-PLANCK EQUATIONS 41
While the Smoluchowski equation is a correct representation of the
Langevin dynamics of eq. (2.51), it is only an approximation to the
Langevin equation of eq. (2.43).
2.3 About Fokker-Planck Equations
Some Properties
Fokker-Planck equations are parabolic differential equations, but of a
special kind. Normally, only a few of the variables appear in the second
derivative part of the equation. (The Smoluchowski equation is an
important exception.) There is no guarantee of a steady state solution.
These equations are generally not self-adjoint, and little is known about
their mathematical properties. It is likely that they can have eigenfunctions
and eigenvalues. These can be worked out in special cases, for
example, a planar rigid rotor or a harmonic oscillator. But there appear
to be no general theorems about the existence or completeness of
eigenfunction expansions and similar questions.
The Smoluchowski equation, as an exception to the general rule, can
be made self-adjoint by a trick. The substitution
leads to a Schrodinger-like equation for g,
The original potential U has been replaced by an effective potential Ueff
involving the force and its derivative. This transformation leads to an
equation whose properties are very well known. It has real eigenvalues
and eigenfunctions, which form a complete set. While finding solutions
may be just as hard as in quantum mechanical problems, there are
no conceptual difficulties. But for the more-general Fokker-Planck
equation, the same trick does not lead to a self-adjoint equation.
As was observed in section 1.5, non-Markovian Langevin equations
with exponentially decaying memory can be converted to Markovian
Langevin equations by increasing the number of variables. Thus, a non-
Markovian two variable Langevin equation with exponential memory
gives rise to a three-variable Markovian Langevin equation and
hence to a three-variable Fokker-Planck equation. By analogy with
Zwanzig, Robert. Nonequilibrium Statistical Mechanics, Oxford University Press, Incorporated, 2001.
ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/utxa/detail.action?docID=281466.
Created from utxa on 2019-01-16 11:29:31.
Copyright © 2001. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.
42 NONEQUILIBRIUM STATISTICAL MECHANICS
non-Markovian Langevin equations, one might be tempted to write
down the corresponding non-Markovian Fokker-Planck equation, that
is, one with memory; this is not safe.
Averages and Adjoint Operators
Sometimes we want the full solution of a Fokker-Planck equation, but
sometimes we are interested only in certain averages. These can be
found by two distinct but equivalent procedures analogous to the
Schrodinger-Heisenberg duality in quantum mechanics.
First, we can follow the evolution of some initial state f(a, t), by
solving the Fokker-Planck equation,
where the operator D is given by
The first part of this operator is the L that appeared earlier. The second
part represents the average effects of noise. The Fokker-Planck
equation has a formal operator solution,
This can be used to get the average of any dynamical property (a)
(including the special case (a) = a),
This may be called the "Schrodinger approach," since it focuses on
the evolution of a probability distribution, and the average is taken at
time t.
The second way to get the average uses the operator that is adjoint
to D defined by
Now the average can be obtained by reversing the operator in the
exponent,
Zwanzig, Robert. Nonequilibrium Statistical Mechanics, Oxford University Press, Incorporated, 2001.
ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/utxa/detail.action?docID=281466.
Created from utxa on 2019-01-16 11:29:31.
Copyright © 2001. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.
FOKKER-PLANCK EQUATIONS 43
which contains the defined time-dependent variable,
This may be called the "Heisenberg approach" since it focuses on the
evolution of a dynamical observable, and the average is taken over an
initial distribution. The equation of motion for becomes
The time dependence of (a, t) is not what one would see in a single
experiment, that is, before averaging over noise. This quantity is defined
so as to give the correct time dependence after averaging over noise
but before averaging over initial conditions.
Because the two operators (D, D ) are so similar in structure,
there is usually no advantage in using one instead of the other, except
in formal operator manipulations. The solution of a Fokker-Planck
equation and its adjoint equation are equally difficult.
Green's Function in the Linear Case
A formal solution of the Fokker-Planck equation, as an initial
value problem, uses the exponential operator exp tD. A more-explicit
solution uses the Green's function G(a, t|a0),
The Green's function satisfies the same Fokker-Planck equation, but
with the special initial condition,
When the streaming function v(a) is linear in a,
the Green's function can be found easily by the following procedure.
First we take the Fourier transform of G (in the language of Appendix
2, we construct the moment generating function),
Zwanzig, Robert. Nonequilibrium Statistical Mechanics, Oxford University Press, Incorporated, 2001.
ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/utxa/detail.action?docID=281466.
Created from utxa on 2019-01-16 11:29:31.
Copyright © 2001. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.
44 NONEQUILIBRIUM STATISTICAL MECHANICS
Then on integrating by parts several times, the Fokker-Planck equation
becomes a first-order partial differential equation,
The logarithm of satisfies
This suggests that we expand In in powers of ,
The time-dependent coefficients obey simple differential equations,
But the initial value of is simply exp(i • a0), so the initial values of the
coefficients are
These equations have solutions,
(The expression for a appeared earlier, in section 1.4, in deriving
the fluctuation-dissipation theorem.) These quantities have a
simple interpretation in terms of averages and mean squared
fluctuations,
The Fourier transform is the exponential of a quadratic function of ,
and so (see Appendix 2) the inverse transform is a quadratic or Gaussian
function of a,
The coefficient of the exponential is the normalization factor.
Zwanzig, Robert. Nonequilibrium Statistical Mechanics, Oxford University Press, Incorporated, 2001.
ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/utxa/detail.action?docID=281466.
Created from utxa on 2019-01-16 11:29:31.
Copyright © 2001. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.
FOKKER-PLANCK EQUATIONS 45
Rotational Diffusion
As an illustration of the use of Fokker-Planck equations, we will work
out the orientational time correlation function of a planar Brownian
rotator. (This was done already, very briefly in section 1.3 using a
Langevin equation). The state is specified by an angle and by an
angular velocity . The rotator has moment of inertia /. Then the
equilibrium distribution function is
The Fokker-Planck equation corresponding the Langevin equation in
section 1.3, with a change from linear velocity to angular velocity, mass
to moment of inertia, and position to angle, is
The orientational time correlation function to be considered here is
where / is an integer (periodicity in angle). According to the previous
discussion, this may be written
So we want the solution of the Fokker-Planck equation for the special
initial condition
The time-dependent solution will have exactly the same angle
dependence as the initial distribution,
Then the time-correlation function is an integral over only,
The Fokker-Planck equation can be solved easily, for this initial
distribution, by the following trick: make the substitution
Zwanzig, Robert. Nonequilibrium Statistical Mechanics, Oxford University Press, Incorporated, 2001.
ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/utxa/detail.action?docID=281466.
Created from utxa on 2019-01-16 11:29:31.
Copyright © 2001. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.
46 NONEQUILIBRIUM STATISTICAL MECHANICS
so that the Fokker-Planck equation transforms into
This looks even harder because of the quadratic nonlinearity but is
actually quite easy to solve. We look for a solution where the exponent
is quadratic,
After some cancelations, this leads to the very simple
Collecting terms, we find ordinary differential equations for a and b,
where
is the angular velocity relaxation time. Initially b(0) = 0, so that b(t) is
and then a(t) — a(0) is
When the a and b parts are combined, and the integral over angular
velocity is performed,
we find
Zwanzig, Robert. Nonequilibrium Statistical Mechanics, Oxford University Press, Incorporated, 2001.
ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/utxa/detail.action?docID=281466.
Created from utxa on 2019-01-16 11:29:31.
Copyright © 2001. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.
FOKKER-PLANCK EQUATIONS 47
(This is identical to the expression found using Langevin equations.) At
short times and long times this goes as
The crossover from one behavior to the other conies at t = T.
Zwanzig, Robert. Nonequilibrium Statistical Mechanics, Oxford University Press, Incorporated, 2001.
ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/utxa/detail.action?docID=281466.
Created from utxa on 2019-01-16 11:29:31.
